Feat: SDK generating framework (#5431)
kubevela/kubevela: design/vela-cli/sdk_generating.md

# SDK Generating

# Introduce

> This proposal introduces a framework which can generate KubeVela SDK from scaffolds, templates and X-Definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces a framework which can generate KubeVela multiple language SDKs from scaffolds, templates and X-Definitions.
```

# Background

As KubeVela designs for separation of concerns, there are two roles of user: platform team and end user. They are dealing with Application in different ways.

> ![image](../resources/separation-of-roles.png)

Reviewer: I see the picture is sized 2mb , can we make it smaller?

### For platform team

> When platform team users assembling Application, filling in components, traits and workflow steps, they are actually assemble Application YAML. Unfortunately, due to the extensibility of KubeVela X-Definition system, the property structure of different component (also for traits, workflow steps, policies) varies. In the source code, we use a `map[string]interface{}` to accept all kinds of properties. The unstructured code make it hard examine, modify, insert values of nested properties.

Reviewer: the platform team don't assemble applications, they install addons, provide X-Definition for extension as their best practices.

Reviewer: The platform team can hardly convince the end user to adopt KubeVela because they can't provide easy-to-use way to assemble Application through SDK without this proposal.

Author: > the platform team don't assemble applications

Yes, they don't. But they provide platform. By "platform team assembling applications", I mean they will build platform which accept argument from end user, then platform assemble the application automatically. This is what "platform" mean. But this kinds of usage will be easily covered by openapi schema and ui-schema like VelaUX has done.

> The platform team can hardly convince the end user to adopt KubeVela because they can't provide easy-to-use way to assemble Application through SDK without this proposal.

True.

Reviewer: Your description here cause confusion, you'd better refine it.

> Before KubeVela provide the SDK, the problem is mainly solved by providing OpenAPI schema to frontend  and generate the form dynamically. There is also an enhancement scheme: ui-schema. After filling the form, the JSON returned by frontend is already satisfied the specification of X-Definition properties. This is how VelaUX works when assembling Application.

Reviewer: End user assemble application, they can assemble through YAML or using VelaUX, when using YAML, the issue occurs.

Actually, the SDK is provided for end users.

### For end user

Basically there are two ways for end user to use Application:

1. Through dashboard provided by platform team like VelaUX. The data is kept by the internal platform. In this pattern user's behavior can be better guided with typed form and UI indications.

> 2. Storing Application as part of the codebase. Then through some way (e.g. GitOps) the application is applied to cluster.

Reviewer: It should be the sdk ways, the sdk can generate yamls out for GitOps or directly apply to cluster.

### Goals & Non-Goals

Goals include the following:
1. Provide a framework to generate SDK for different languages.

> 2. Provide a Go SDK as an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Provide a Go SDK as one of the first core SDK to proof of concept.
```

Reviewer: ```
3. The SDK must provide functions to meet the following scenarios:
    - Discover Definition and generate the SDK API code automatically
    - Be able to do CRUD on OAM concepts including Component/Trait/Workflow/Policy. 
    - Be able to generate application YAML and directly apply to KubeVela control plane cluster.
```

Author: > Discover Definition and generate the SDK API code automatically

This is wrong. It should be done by sdk generator not sdk itself. SDK should not generating new API while using it. But it's fine to ask sdk generator to discover definition from Clsuter

Reviewer: Yes, then add the sdk-generator in our goals.

> Non-goals include the following:
> 1. Provide SDK for all languages immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-goals include the following:
1. We hope to provide SDK for as much languages as we can, but it's not possible to provide sdks for all languages. We'll just target the popular languages such as Go, Typescript, Java, Python, PHP, and etc. 
```

### For end user

If user is writing Application YAML, they have to refer to the doc. Although we have done some toolchain on this topic like `vela show`, a typed SDK also provide a possibility for end user to code Application in different languages.

## Design and tools

Thanks to the OpenAPI schema and related tool [openapi-generator](https://github.com/OpenAPITools/openapi-generator) in ecosystem, we can re-use the almost ready templates to generate code. The whole generation process is shown below.

![image](../resources/sdk-gen-process.png)

**Step0**: The scaffold is written to destination if `--init` is specified. (omitted in pic)

**Step1**: Generate OpenAPI schema from CUE. The generated schema may not fully prepared as input of openapi-generator and it will be correct and adjust.

**Step2**: Call openapi-generator to generate SDK. After that some modification will be applied to make SDK API suited for KubeVela user.

## Examples

This command requires `java` and `mvn` in PATH as we are leveraging openapi-generator which is a Java progarm.

```shell
# Initialize the SDK, generate API from all definitions, 

> vela def gen-api -f /path/to/def/dir -o /path/to/sdk --init

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vela def gen-api --init -f /path/to/def/dir -o /path/to/sdk --lang java
```

Please specify the language.

# Incrementally generate API from definitions
vela def gen-api -f /path/to/def/dir -o /path/to/sdk
```

## Future work

This PR only provide a framework on generating SDK and there are lots of jobs to do to provide
user-friendly SDKs in multiple languages.

### For SDK generating

1. Provide SDK in other languages. This is a LFX mentorship: #5365
2. Allow user to customize the templates in Step2.

> ### For Golang SDK

Reviewer: We need a section called "Language Caution" to describe the difference and notable points inside.

Author: That would be great. And I think it should be part of kubevela.io
